I don't know how this is going to tie in with an
article on Chad Oliver, other than it's your
opinion.
Well, I guess I ought to set the stage and qualify it
a little bit. Never met John Kim.
During the period that I was writing a lot for a
Stanley Analog under various titles, John and I
corresponded prodigiously. and I gather this is
more or less a requirement if you're going to write
for Campbell, is that you get involved in these
endless arguments and discussion by mail. I don't
know how he does it, you know. I mean, he used to send
me fantastic letters, you know, 27 pages
single-spaced. I remember one of them was, and
this is a busy man, you know, I don't know how he does
it. You know, John, he still reads, I guess,
everything that comes in himself, unless it's
just obviously illiterate. I guess that's what
the assistant editor does, is weed out the stuff
that is just hopeless, you know, and he reads
everything else, and he writes tremendously
about it. That's one qualification. The other
qualification is that I, as I said, I haven't read
or kept up with the field like I used to, and this
includes the editorials and analog, which I
suppose is what you're really talking about. So I
can't comment very specifically. Let me just say
this, that
Camel was probably the single most influential
man in the development of what we call modern
science fiction. I mean, it seems to me this is
beyond argument, but if Campbell had not come
along when he did and done what he did with
Astounding, the whole course of science fiction
would have been, I think, radically different,
and I think his influence was definitely
beneficial. That isn't what you want me to say, I
know, but apart from everything else, he was an
amazingly creative editor. Not in the sense that
Tony Boucher was. I mean, Campbell's talent is not
in taking a manuscript, and saying, well, this is
what's wrong with it. Do this, that, and the other,
but we're going to do it your way. Campbell's
talent is in finding writers and in stimulating
them to make them want to write for him. And one way
he does this, it's exactly the same way McAllister
teaches. McAllister used to call it education by
irritation. Campbell has exactly the same pitch.
Well, what he does is he throws out these
controversial statements and remarks, and where
he gets you so mad that you sit down with a
typewriter and write a story to refute him, or
agree with him if that's the case, but in any case,
he gets you involved. And after all, look at the
writers that this guy found. It's fantastic.
That's one side of Kim. I respect him, I admire him,
I really do. I don't know. I suppose ultimately it
comes down to what your view of science fiction is
and how important you think it is. But if you once
grant the premise that it is worth something,
there's nobody that's more responsible for what
it is today than John Campbell. Okay. Negative
side. The thing that always annoyed me the most
about John, and it's something that I... really
found almost incomprehensible in a man who was a
writer himself, and a rather good one too, not so
much under his own name, but as Don Stewart, he
wrote some fine things, is his total lack of
concern with writing quality. He doesn't care, at
least as far as I can determine, if he likes the idea
And if it's written just well enough to hold
somebody's attention, that's apparently all he
demands. And I really am not sure that it's so much a
hostility on John's part toward fancy writing,
trick writing as he often calls it, literary
writing, that sort of thing. I don't really think
that's it. I think he just doesn't give a damn. And
if he got a story that was written in trick prose and
it happened to be about something that really
punched one of his buttons and it was
comprehensible to his readers, I guess he'd print
it. But he's just not interested in writing. He's
not interested in literary quality. And this I
find hard to take. And it's one of the One of the
reasons for the curious status of analog right
now, and here's a magazine that in a way is the best
magazine in the field. In a sense, I guess it still
has a bigger circulation than any other science
fiction magazine. You pick it up and there won't be
a name on the contents page you ever heard of
before. None of the big names in science fiction
write for analog, and yet this is the showcase of
the film. Maybe he knows what he's doing. With
regard to the editorials, that's a different can
of worms. John has always been or always liked to
think of himself as being an iconoclast, an
individual, idiosyncratic, always going
against whatever the popular current might be. He
has this image of himself. And I don't know. Nobody
agrees with everything that John Campbell says. I
doubt that John himself agrees with all of it. And
the reaction I get is that John is one of these guys
that just automatically opposes the popular
point of view, whatever it is, the easy point of
view, and is always trying to make an argument on
the other side. I think a lot of what he says is
highly dubious. The alleged racism, for example,
A number of other things. I don't share John's
interest in psi factors and all this stuff, and we
used to argue endlessly about this. I think John
has lots of peculiar ideas about history, for
example, certainly about anthropology. But at
the same time, you've got to say that this is no
fool. A lot of what John says makes sense, even if he
does push it further than most people would push
it. And he does have a talent for not being
impressed by a lot of fancy names, not being
impressed by a lot of footnotes and verbiage, but
going to the heart of the argument and saying, hey,
wait a minute. Have you ever tried looking at it
this way? And it's not a popular thing to do. It's a
hard thing to do. And maybe it's worth doing,
whether you agree with him or not. So what? What a
terrible world this would be if everything was so
blame him. that everybody had to agree with every
statement that he makes. And God knows the remarks
that Campbell makes aren't nearly as
controversial as lots of remarks that are made on
the other side. That's quite true. It's also a
footnote becoming rather more respectable, some
of it, in that for a long time John has questioned
this idea that everything in human behavior is a
matter of conditioning, a matter of culture,
which was a stock involvement of the social
sciences for years. Now on a popular level along
come people like Robert Argery and Desmond
Morris, and on a scientifically more respectable
level I suppose you get people like Conrad Lorenz
and a number of anthropologists, Sherry
Warshburn, who are saying exactly the same thing.
And John's arguments are not totally nonsense.
and said he's taking his lumps now. Who's he taking
them from and about what? Primarily these people
you would classify as new waivers who are against
the very things you've been talking about now.
It's nothing new. It's been happening a while. And
his magazine still has the highest circulation by
far. John just doesn't care about that kind of
writing. And as I say, maybe the guy knows what he's
doing. Most people, when they pick up a magazine,
they want to read a story. Most people, to tell you
the truth, don't have any idea whether the writing
quality is good, bad, or indifferent anyway, as
long as they can get through it. But just the same,
for a guy who was a writer, it's surprising he's not
more concerned with it than he is. Given the
choice, however, mind saying this, if I were just
going to pick up one magazine to read on my way home
tonight, it would probably be Analog.
You
haven't been, probably haven't seen the
fantastic, I believe it is, where Alexia Panchin
is getting into the criticism of science fiction.
No, I have not. It's got an interesting series
going there in that magazine, which you might find
of interest in some kind. Well, yeah, thanks, I
will. Yeah, we really... We almost never had a
critic in science fiction, really, until Damon
Knight came along. And I disagree emphatically
with Damon. But he did some very worthwhile
things. I think his essays on Van Vogt, for
example. The only trouble with Damon's criticism
is that he doesn't have the talent that Boucher
had. He destroyed the writer. if you're at all
sensitive to criticism, you know, you read what
Damon has to say about you, gosh, you go slink away
in the night and never write another line. Tony had
this marvelous facility, you know, even if he
didn't like something, of making you want to go on,
and not only that, but helping you, giving you some
concrete suggestions. The trouble with Damon,
and don't quote this, please, I was asked to review
a book of Damon's short stories one time by Doug
Parker. who's now chairman of the classics
department here. I don't know if you know Doug or
not, he's a big science fiction fan. He was out at
the University of California in Riverside where
he had a book review column in the paper and
reviewed science fiction. He asked me to review a
book of Damon's one time and I finally just
declined because I couldn't think of anything
good to say about it. He admires a kind of a
bloodless, technically expert, to me utterly
trivial kind of a story. When you get to a question
of anything about impact or something that hits
the gut or something like that, Damon doesn't know
what you're talking. He doesn't even know what
you're trying to do, much less whether you
succeeded or not. And I find it very debilitating.
But just the same, until Damon came along, there
was very little intelligent comment on science
fiction. And what he has to say is intelligent.
It's interesting. I just think he's dead wrong.
That's it. Blish seems to be the primary critic
right now. Yeah. Well, Blish is another one. I
mean, who is James Blish? He's a James Joyce
scholar, among other men. And if you've ever met
Blish, or read anything about him, he's another
one of these rather bloodless, terribly cerebral
types. And, you know, is this all science fiction?
You know, it It was a stock criticism that was
leveled at science fiction for years, mostly by
people who didn't know anything about it. But
there is a grain of truth in it, that the one area
that is so deficient is in characterization.
There are no recognizable human beings in here. In
fact, somebody once made the comment, fairly
perceptively, that the robots and androids are
the most human people in science fiction. And on
the other hand, that it was... so terribly
intellectual and cerebral that it just never had
any force or power. And it seems to me that the ideal
fiction of somebody like James Blish or Damon
Knight is precisely this kind of fiction. It's
dead. And you ask, well, what did Damon Knight ever
write? The best story Damon ever wrote is a joke. I
mean, literally a joke. You know, not with a bang.
You know, the one about the last man and the last
woman.
Well, I suppose part of the problem is that you've
got to face this about yourself. I'm the aberrant
one. I'm quite unlike most science fiction
writers that I know, for better or for worse. And
I've... I've worked rather largely isolated from
the mainstream, or whatever you want to call it.
And my conception of what science fiction should
be and the kind of book I want to write is very
different from what most of them are trying to do.
That's just the way it is. And I guess it's only
natural that I happen to like what I'm trying to do,
not saying I'm doing it correctly. And I've never
read any criticism in science fiction. that
really struck me as being addressed to the same set
of problems that I would address if I were writing,
but I'm not going to write, so I'm going to leave it
at that. Maybe a loss for science fiction as a- You
do have- Tony came closer.
Tony wasn't a critic, he was a reviewer, his own
phrase. But the great quality that he had was that
he was so eclectic. The amazing thing about Tony
was he could see merit in widely different types of
stories. Tony would love anything from Mission to
Gravity to More Than Human, you know, and see no
problem there. If Tony were still alive, he'd love
the new wave. I don't think there's any doubt about
it. But at the same time, he'd like the old wave,
too. And maybe that's what we need.
But you know, this whole new wave business, you
can't really divorce it from the rest of
literature. It's really a sign that science
fiction is less ingram than it used to be, and that
you have a number of people who are writing science
fiction, but aren't just science fiction
writers, and they're concerned about what's
happening in literature generally, whether you
like it or not is another question. There's some
modern things I like very much. I mean, apart from
science fiction, although I'm terribly dated by
modern things. I like Lawrence Durrell's
Alexandria Quartet. I thought it was superb. And I
don't know what the hell you'd call it, but it's
certainly not a traditional piece of fiction. I
like Catch-22. And I like Dyke's Rabbit Run,
although I thought the big sex novel was a
disaster. I think... What's the name of it?
Couples. An utter mystery to me, how a guy with the
talent that that guy has could write Couples,
except I know the answer perfectly well, he made 20
times. I was just going to say, great big dollar
sign. But he can flat write, no question about
it. This is probably the most disorganized
interview you've ever conducted, if you can make
head or tail out of this stuff. Well, I'm not an
accomplished interviewer. It's probably
obvious. I've not attempted it very often, and
probably won't attempt it too much more. Well, I
hope I haven't scared you off for the rest of your
life. Oh, no. It's just an area you have to learn in,
as anywhere else. No, you're doing fine. I meant
that as a criticism of me, not of you. My voice is
gradually... You're picking out a lot of...
You're adding many things to the questions that
really are... You'd get a messy answer. Yes or no of
the witness, then. Just out of curiosity, and
again, probably not related to the article, but
have you done anything with your manuscripts, or
have you made any plans to do anything with your
manuscripts? No.
It was only, well, I don't know, four years ago,
something like that, but suddenly the notion
percolated that these might have some value. And I
haven't kept a tremendous amount from the early
days. I've got some. I've got some boxes of stuff in
Kerrville. I don't even know what's in them. But
the last time I looked through there, there were a
lot of original manuscripts and some working
notes and things like that. But for the last four or
five years, I've kept everything. I've kept
working notes and first drafts and typescripts
and notes to myself and everything else as I was
working along on the stories. So I will have it in
the future. In the past, it's pretty sporadic. I
don't know what I've done, but I think I've got the
original manuscripts of almost everything I've
ever written. At least a carbon of it. As to what I'm
going to do with them ultimately, I don't know. I
was just curious, I know Syracuse is very actively
interested in acquiring, and I know UT, of course,
which you might have a particular feeling for, is
very interested in keeping Texas writers at home,
so to speak. When I was here and talking to people. I
haven't, it really isn't even fair to say I haven't
made a decision. I haven't even thought about it.
I've just gotten to the point where I've stopped
throwing things away. And what I would do with it
ultimately, I just don't know. You worry about
that ultimately. Yeah, I worry about it
ultimately. I think a lot of it would really
depend, just like any writer, on whether there was
some place at some time that had a specific
interest in my stuff. where I have a feeling that if
I did give it or if they bought it or whatever they
did with it, it wouldn't just sit in a box
somewhere. It might be useful
to someone. Outside of your personal papers, what
sort of a science fiction library do you have? Do
you still have your old pulps? Yeah, not here. I'm
in the process of trying to design a study for
myself. We've got 15 acres of land out here off BK
Road, a very small house. I originally had one room
in there I could use as a study, but that was before
my son came along. He's three years old. Well, I've
got now, I've got a desk and a bedroom, which is
about where I started out years ago. And we just
don't have a room. to store things in the house. But
when I get the study built finally and I can get all
the stuff together, I'll bring it up. It's almost
all in Kerrville. And to answer that, I've got,
during the period where I was reading everything,
I kept everything. And from, well, I don't know,
41, 42, whenever it was, on through, I guess, the
middle 50s. I've got virtually everything.
Magazines, paperbacks, hard bans, the works.
Prior to that date, I have scattered stuff. I went
back and I bought a lot of early amazing stories and
wonder stories and weird tales and things like
that. I kept all that. I'd say that the collection
is probably very good. up through about maybe
1955, 1956, and very scattered since then.
I just don't buy anything like the number of books
and magazines that I used to, but virtually
everything I glom onto I keep. It's getting
difficult to buy three or four hundred new books a
year. It's fiction. Aside from the expenses. The
early stuff, I think it would probably be a pretty
interesting library. There's somebody in the,
you know, I have things, you know, The Outsiders
and things like that. In fact, I've got that whole
early run up from Arkham House. And I've got things
like Ray Cummings' old books, like, you know, The
Conqueror, and The Sea Girl, and all that stuff,
and all of Burroughs' stuff back in the old cloth
band, the early editions, and just about
everything else that popped up, all the early
anthologies and things
like that. That's good. I think that ought to tie it
up for now. We've taken plenty of your time. It's
been a pleasure. I hope I've given you what you want
and not too much of what you don't want. Well, as I
said, as is the case usually with me, I'll probably
have to come back with some questions if you would
not answer them. I'd be delighted. And I want to
apologize and explain to you why I've been so
difficult to get hold of. The bulk of it is simply
the old stock story about I've been too busy. And
the weekends, I've gotten to the point where I'm
under so much pressure all week that come Saturday
I just like to take off and what I'm doing is nothing
more stimulating than going fishing. But I really
have gotten to the point where I need it. So I'm not
usually available on weekends, but where I am,
it's down on the river. But I am sorry that it's
taken so long to get together. Well, it's been no
problem from my standpoint. I'll have to go over
this many times, and I have the time, so no problem
at all. I'm just hoping that I'm going to have the
time in the next few years to get back and really do
some rockin'. Well, six or eight novelettes are
all worked up and ready to go with no time to write
them. And I have a couple of other novels that I want
to write. I think the next one probably will not be
science fiction, but the one after that will be.
And I don't know. Things are bound to be better in
the next four years than they've been in the last
four years. It's been a bit of a drag.
Okay, well, I appreciate the problems of the
department, Chairman.
It's been fantastic. Not as bad in a way this year as
the previous three because there's been so much
chaos in the administration. This past year has
almost been a holding operation where the big
problem has been to avoid doing things because no
matter what you try to do, you're going to turn
them. In fact, well, let's just wait a while on
that. But that can have its problems too. But for
three years, I put in a long day every day in the
office. You'd look back at the end of the day and ask
yourself, well what the hell did I do that was
useful? That's pretty hard to point at anyway. But
it's ending. That's good. You're going back.
There will be a new chairman. There'll be a new
chairman. But actually, I'll be through as a or
around the 1st of June because there will be an
acting chairman that will take over the summit.
Who's going to be the headman? Yes, his name is
Jerry Epstein. Oh, Dr. Epstein is? Yeah, you know
Jerry.
Well, we can look forward to you having some time.
Well, I hope so. It's bound to be more time than I've
had anyway. I joined the N3F this past year for the
first time just out of curiosity more than
anything. I'm not really active in fandom other
than the fact that it gives me a lot of information.
It's been going on for a long time, you know. It
really has. I'm learning more about it and
becoming more interested. But among other
things, I noted that I collected the works of Chad
Oliver and in the welcome committee letters, many
people commented that It's too damn bad, Chad
Oliver's not writing some more. For what it's
worth. I thank you for passing that on. You're not
forgotten, that's for sure. Well, it helps to know
that, believe me. I get letters occasionally from
people who have read my stuff, and they always
begin in effect like, gee, I apologize for
imposing on your time, but I'd just like to say such
and such, and my god, that's what you live for. I'm
pleased that you liked it. If I understood you
correctly, I don't know what kind of a reaction
it's going to get. It's very odd. I'm indexing all
reviews of science fiction books that appear in
science fiction magazines and in Library Journal
and Publishers Weekly and so forth, so I'll pass on
any reviews that I run across. Just pass on a good
one. The only bad thing about this book was that I
wrote to Kay Kidd, who's the senior editor at
Cigna, and a wonderful gal, and just been great to
work with, and she just moved heaven and earth to
get this published and hard down in this country,
and it fell through at the last minute. But a
wonderful gal, and I pointed this out to her. I
wrote actually about it. One sentence was in
there. Yeah, that's right. I wrote actually about
the cover, and I said that I liked it a lot, and I'd
like to get the original if I could. And I just
mentioned that I wished I could say the same for the
blurred copy. Specifically, it's not designed to
appeal to anybody who might for any reason want to
pick up the book. has nothing to appeal to a science
fiction reader, has nothing to appeal to anybody
who's interested in conservation, ecology,
whatever you want to call it, which is a theme that
runs all through. Instead, it's the killing time
for the big people. What the hell was that? It's
like you just thumbed through the book at random
and picked out a sentence. Yeah, I think it's
terrible. But the next, the other question I have
is, they quote Anthony Belcher here, do you have
Any knowledge of where or when that review? If I'm
not mistaken, I
think they've got it wrong in that I don't think
that was in the New York Times, although it may have
been. It may have been in connection with a review
of one of my books. I think he wrote it in the
magazine of fantasy and science fiction, where
the quote actually came from. Bill Nolan dug it up
and used it, I think, in Three to Three as a Highest
Power, and that's where they picked it up. But if
I'm not mistaken, it didn't come from the New York
Times, except in the sense that he was working for
the New York Times. My recollection of it is rather
vague, but I think it was in the introductory blurb
to one of my stories in Fantasy and Science Fiction
that he originally wrote that. What would you say
would be the reaction of Bill Nolan if we would
write to him about your bibliography? See how many
gaps we've got? I'm curious. We'd probably be
told. Any idea where we might write him? Yeah,
except I don't have it. I don't have his address
here. I do at home. I'd be glad to call you. tomorrow
and give it to them. I appreciate it. Just for
goodness sakes, don't mention anything about my
reactions. Oh no, I just said other than we visited
with him and we've been trying to file one and a pair
of notes or nothing else. I'm not sure he'd be doing
it. And I'd be glad to give you his address. I'm
sorry, I just don't have it. That's quite alright.
I'd like to ask a favor of you. I gave this to Lan
Hewlett, our academic counselor over there. I
said give his regards. I know Lan. And a man Took it
from my desk Saturday. He was helping us work at the
basketball tournament. Took it home with him to
finish reading. Didn't tell me about it. Told one
of my bosses. And so he made a special trip home to
get it today so I could bring it over and if you would
autograph it for Lan. To Lan?
Uh-huh. Here's a pen. Yeah, I need it. These
paperbacks are...
I saw that the, excuse me, the... We've thoroughly
addicted him to your writing, by the way. I met him
today for the first time. Oh, he's a nice guy. I'm
sorry to hear about his wife. Yeah, that was at the
UCLA football game just before the game began. She
dropped dead of a heart attack. Yeah, I
understand. Maybe I'd better borrow your pen. He
was writing. Now,
that explains his talent. He's left-handed, too.
Aha! I accuse my wife, who's also left-handed, of
having been born backwards. Well, I
had a football coach in high school who used to say,
Shad, as he always called me, you are no-handed.
And in a way, it's the truth. I'm almost
ambidextrous. I write left-handed, and I'm
slightly better casting with a fly rod with my left
hand, but I do almost everything else
right-handed.